(upbeat music)
Now let's talk about animation in React.
And I really like how this is done because after we put
a couple tags wrapped around our components
then it's just a matter of playing with the CSS
to get everything up and running.
So there's two different kinds of animations
that we've got going on.
The first one is mounting and unmounting
of different components.
So when I add Atlantic Salmon to my order
it slides itself on in and then when I remove it
from my order it will slide itself out.
That's animating the component did mount
and the component will unmount,
those things come in and go out.
And then the other one is is that just when something
changes we wanna be able to animate that up and down.
So once I add Atlantic Salmon
and I add a couple more, you see that it just goes
bong, bong, bong, bong, bong, bong,
it just keeps on climbing.
So that's what we're gonna do is we're going to start
with the animating it in and animating it out
and then we'll look at a little bit more complicated one
which is the bong, bong, bong,
I don't know what you call that, bong, bong, bong,
let's call it that.
(laughter)
So open up your order dot JS and at the very top
we need to import a couple things.
We're going to import transition group and CSS transition
and that's going to be coming from
the React transition group package,
then we have these two new components
called transition group and CSS transition
and let's go down to this unordered list
of our order, that's where we're going to be
mapping through everything.
We're gonna put the each on it's own line.
First thing we're gonna do is replace this unordered list
with the transition group tag and then we still want it
to be an ordered list at the end of the day
so we're going to give it a component property,
and this is the, if you look at docs for transition group,
this tells it what element at the end of the day
to actually render out to the page.
So it's an unordered list, good, give that a save.
And we'll go back to here and make sure
that everything is still working, beautiful.
If I add a new one it'll still add, okay, good.
Then we need to take every single LI
that we're rendering out and wrap it in
that other thing that we imported, the CSS transition tag.
So let's go to, again, remember we kicked it off
to the separate render order function
and now we have this LI for either not finding it
or for finding it.
Now this is a bit tricky because we're returning
three things here and only these two should be wrapped
in CSS transition because null shouldn't be wrapped
in a CSS, in fact it will error out if it is.
So let's get it working on this one
and then I'll show you a little trick we can do
to not double write the same code.
So around here we're going to make a CSS transition tag
and we're going to wrap that LI and then the CSS transition
takes a number of different properties.
First one is class names, with an S, that's not a typo
and I'll show you why it needs that in just a second,
and we're just gonna say order.
Second is it also needs a key, so I'll just say key.
And third it needs a timeout, which is an object
of how fast do they come in and how fast do they go out,
so I'll say enter at 250 milliseconds
and exit at 250 milliseconds.
Good, so now we have this CSS transition group.
Now the weird thing is is that we need to also
copy it and put it on this one as well,
same with the closing tag.
Again, I'll show you a little trick we can do
so that we're not duplicating that
over and over, we can make a reusable
wrapper component for that.
So let's go back to our app and make sure
everything is still working.
Now when I add items to my order and remove them,
ooh, it's already animating for me
and that's because I've shipped you the CSS,
but we're going to delete all the CSS
and write it together so I can show you
exactly how it works.
So what I want you to do is to go back to your application,
open up the CSS folder and inside of that
you're going to see animations dot STYL.
And you see order enter, order exit, count enter
and count exit.
So what we're gonna do is just go ahead and delete
all of that and we're gonna write it together.
Now, a couple things before we even get running
on writing this CSS.
So first of all I'm using a language called Stylus
and Stylus is exactly the same as Sass, it just has
the option of doing it based on indentation
rather than using colons and semicolons.
However, if you are not totally comfortable
with Stylus because it's based on indentation,
then make sure that you put in the colons
and the curly brackets under all of them,
just write it like regular CSS and not like Stylus.
Because I know some people can get tripped up on it,
this is a tab character, sorry, this is two spaces,
not a tab character and I know in Stylus
if you mix tabs and spaces it will break.
So that's just a personal preference,
there's nothing there specifically that you need to use.
Second is, how do we actually compile this?
So if you're using Stylus or Sass
or any of these pre-processors, how do you compile it?
And the downside to using Create React app
is that you cannot use any sort of custom CSS
pre-processor in your web pack build
unless you do something called eject.
So what we need to do is open up our package dot JSON
and you're gonna see that I have two scripts here
that will actually run the Stylus compiling
outside of our Create React app.
The first one just does a single compile
of our Sylus dot style file and compiles it
to a style dot CSS and the second one
watches for changes and then will re-compile
them every single time.
So really the only difference is the dash W flag
which will watch.
So we wanna run styles watch.
So we're gonna go to our terminal and kill
the process that we currently have,
we can hit control, C and now we wanna run NPM
run styles colon watch and what that's gonna do
is it's going to first compile our CSS
and then watch for any future changes.
So that's pretty neat because what I can do
is open up my animations, delete that,
give it a save and you can see
that it will trigger a re-render,
it's that compiled style dot CSS
and then if I were to say, div background red
it will compile a second one and so on and so on.
So that's great, but now what I did
is I actually just broke my local host from running.
So how do you run both the styles and our NPM start
at the same time?
Well, that's what this package concurrently does.
You could just open up two terminal tabs
and run NPM start for your app
and run NPM styles watch for that,
but it's probably easier just to run this watch one
which will concurrently run two things here,
NPM run start and NPM run styles watch.
That's what it does in both ones.
So we're gonna do that, kill it, I'm gonna run NPM run watch
and that runs concurrently two things.
And it's kinda neat, it'll tell you first
what is the web pack output and second
what is the Stylus output.
So if you see console logs anywhere
you see exactly what you're working on.
And, oh (laughter) everything is red, why?
Because I showed you this, I said any div
has a background red, which is hilarious.
So we don't actually need that, give it a save
and it's gonna regenerate all of the styles for us.
Good, so why do we have this animation file anyway?
And I'll show you exactly why.
So first thing we need to do is go to our order.
And remember when we did the CSS transition,
we said enter 250 milliseconds, let's make that
5,000 milliseconds, that means it's gonna be five seconds
to enter and five seconds to leave.
Now what I want you to do is just use your regular dev tools
to inspect one of these LIs and hit the X on it.
See what's happening here?
It gives it a class of order exit in order exit active
and it's still there, but after five seconds
it actually removes the list item.
Same thing when I add, maybe, let's see,
I'm gonna add King Crab, it will automatically add
the LI, give it a class of order enter
and order enter active and then after five seconds
it will remove those classes.
So what's happening here is it's leaving,
it's leaving, it's leaving, it's leaving
and boom, now it's gone.
What's happening is it's giving us
these states as CSS classes and then we can go ahead
and use those CSS classes to add animation to it.
So if we go to our animations here
and we say, we've got two states, we have order enter
and then we also have another selector
is going to be order exit.
So let's just do order enter first.
And when the, has that order enter
let's just give it a background of red
and then when it has a class of also
having a class of order enter active let's give it
a background of yellow, a background-a,
a background of yellow.
So let's see what that looks like.
So I'm just gonna remove this one, remove this one,
takes five seconds to remove now
because we put that five seconds on there
and then it will finally unmount it,
but as I add it in now, you see how it's yellow immediately
and watch what happens now.
If I go to my order enter and I add a transition
of 0.5 seconds, or not, five seconds, watch now.
I'm gonna go to Mussels and you see over five seconds
it's animating because what's happening
is that React gives it a class of order enter immediately
and then 0.1 milliseconds later it's giving it a class
of order enter active.
And because these two things are done
at a different time, then we can then transition
all of the properties from its starting state
to it's finished state, which in this case
is just changing the background
and it's gonna transition
those properties over five seconds.
So that's great and what we can do with that
is we can put a transform on it of a translate X
negative 120% and then when it is active
we can give it a transform, translate X of zero.
So it's gonna go from all the way off to the left
to all the way where it should be.
Let's see here.
Move these suckers and let's find one
that I haven't yet added, Jumbo Prawns,
woop, there it comes.
And add another one, woop, another one, another one.
You see how it immediately gives it that class
and then we have that five seconds to animate itself in.
And then after five seconds it's going to remove
all of these classes and none of these CSS properties
are going to be applied to it.
So same thing can go for order exit.
Order exit, so we're gonna say, background thistle
and when the dot order exit active
let's say, give it a background of pale goldenrod.
And of course we need to, let's just take that transition
and put that on there as well.
So now when I remove it it's going to make it thistle
and then remove it, remove, remove, remove
and then after five seconds it totally removes it.
Oh, that's because I need an ampersand here,
it's not turning pale goldenrod.
So let me try that once more.
Animate them on in.
And then when I remove them they start to fade
themselves out.
Okay, good.
Well what we can do now is the opposite.
So the order exit will be translate X zero,
start where it is, and then when it's active
translate itself all the way to the right-hand side
of plus 120%.
So these should animate themselves in
and then when I click the X they start
to animate themselves on out.
It's so cool because everything is just CSS at this point
and we can do some little neat things.
So we can say, give it a max height of zero
and a padding of zero as well
and active we'll give it a max height of 60 PX
and a padding of two rem zero.
And what that's gonna do is by giving it a max height
you cannot transition from height auto to height
whatever it is, so by doing a max height
it's a bit of a hack that will allow us
to transition from one to another.
So by adding these they will start to grow as we have it
as they come in.
And then of course we can move these transition
to 0.5 seconds and 0.5 seconds
and then transitions are gonna be much quicker.
But the other thing is is that they're not removed
until five seconds later.
So we need to go back into our order and change these
enter and exits to 500 milliseconds or 250 milliseconds
to get these nice animations, woop, I like it.
Zoop, zoop.
It's not doing it just like my answer,
so I think that there's one more thing we need to do here
on the padding in order to overwrite the default padding
that I have in my style dot CSS,
let's just put some important tags
and then on the exit we want to do that as well,
on the adding we'll just say padding zero,
I think that should take care of it.
Beautiful.
That removing and then we're removing.
And let's get rid of all of these colors here.
Everything is nice, oh, there's still red.
There we go.
Cool, so the other one is when you wanna add multiples.
So eight, nine, 10, 11, it's a little bit different
because it's not just unmounting and mounting,
it's actually replacing a old div, like right here
we have, let's open it up, we have this 19,
that's going to be a span, but we are going to add
a second and what's gonna happen
is we're actually gonna have a 19 and a 20
and we're gonna animate the 19 up and then the 20
will animate into it's actual spot.
So we need to into our order dot JS
and we need to start wrapping some of this stuff
in some spans so that we have some sort
of elements to grab onto.
So this count here is going to be on its own line.
And we're going to wrap that in a span.
Save, see where we're at, still working, good, woo.
And then we will wrap everything inside of the LI
in another span just because that's how the CSS
is working out.
So we have an LI and we have a span
and then inside of that we have a span
and then the lbs and the button.
So does that give us what we're looking for?
Yes, it does.
Okay, and now we need to give ourselves
another transition group.
So inside of here we're going to wrap
this count here in a transition group.
Put the span inside of that.
And then we're going to wrap that span itself
in a CSS transition component.
Now the CSS transition needs a few options here
and also with the transition group,
so this is going to be a component,
it's going to be a span and the class name
is going to be count.
And the CSS transition the class names
is going to be count, that's going to be count enter
and count enter active, et cetera, et cetera.
The key is not going to be a key,
but the key is going to be the count
and by doing that it will tell the CSS transition group
to make two separate span elements
so that if we're going from 19 to 20
it's gonna animate the 20 or the 19 out
and the 20 on in and then the timeout
let's do the same thing we did before
which is we'll say, enter is going to be 5,000 milliseconds
and exit is going to be 5,000 as well.
And then my prettier just took care
of some of the formatting there.
I should note that, what is this double curly brackets here?
Well, the first set of curly brackets
is to tell React it's JavaScript
and the seconds is just an object literal.
So you could also make a settings object
and then up here say, const settings is equal to that,
but I'd rather just pass it as an object literal
because it's much...
Alright, nice, now let's go ahead
and inspect just that six.
And click on Pacific Halibut and you see
how it's, we got count enter and so one of them
is entering and the other one is exiting
and then after five seconds it removes all those class.
Let me show you again, count enter, count enter active
and count exit, count exit active.
So we actually have two different,
and if you hit it a couple times,
you see that we actually have all of the different
spans for five seconds, it duplicates them
and then after our timeout that we've specified here
it will actually remove them.
So we can go into our animations here and do the same thing.
So we'll say, dot count enter, background red
and transition five seconds.
And we'll say, and when it has a class of count
enter active background yellow.
So then it transitions itself from red to yellow,
it doesn't look like it, oh, counter, count enter active
that should do it.
You see it transitions itself from red, it's immediately red
and then it goes to yellow and will move itself on up.
So what we want to do with our count enter
is we're going to again transform it,
but this time we're gonna go on the top to bottom,
so we're gonna translate why 100%.
So it's going to start, the new one is gonna start
underneath the 31, it's gonna be 32, it's gonna start
underneath and then when it is active
it's gonna translate itself on up to zero.
Let's see what that looks like.
Woop, woop, you see every time I add a new one
it will animate itself all the way up
and then when it's done it will remove
all of those classes, so that's good.
Now we need to take care of the one that's exiting
so that you can see that it just moves over right now,
that 41 moves over, but we wanna do the same thing,
we wanna overlap it and animate itself all the way up.
So let's go, I'm gonna say dot count exit
background black and count exit active background green.
Let's make sure that this works.
There we go, so it's green.
So we want a transform by default,
actually we can just duplicate it,
we're going to, by default we're gonna start at zero
and then when it is active we're going to go to the top
which is negative 100%, it should animate
itself vertically, and then we also want a transition
of five seconds on that one.
So is this gonna, you see the ones leaving
as the other one comes up and then as soon
as it's offscreen (click) it removes itself.
So again, it moves on up and the other one comes in.
The only problem is that they're not overlapping
each other and that's a pretty quick fix.
We need to put a position absolute in there,
left zero, bottom zero and they should,
since this one is absolute and this one is just static
they should overlap each other
and animate themselves on up.
So there we go.
If you do a whole bunch it gets a little bit crazy,
but it still totally works.
Animate itself on up.
And so you can do some really fun stuff with this
where as it leaves you can scale three.
So the one that's leaving gets much bigger, woo.
Same with this.
We could do some other fun stuff
or a count enter active or maybe,
let's go order enter active.
So we're transforming it, but we also wanna rotate it,
I don't know, 1,000 degrees.
And then it will, woo, oh, that's not in there.
Remove a whole bunch of these and then when I add one.
(laughter)
It'll animate itself in.
So what's 360 degrees times four, let's move it
a full amount.
And it'll Batman itself on in.
It should be Batmaning itself in, I think it's because
we should add a rotate zero to the initial state
and then rotate it 1,440 degrees when you do have it.
So if I get rid of all these.
(laughter)
There we go, boodaloodaloo, sort of Batmans in
as we want it.
And you can do anything you could possibly want
other than just translating the X value
you can change the colors, you can change the font size,
you can rotate it any amount that you could possibly want.
So I find it is a little bit tricky to get
the whole transition group thing up and running,
but once you have those classes being added to it
then it's just a CSS issue from there on out.
Last thing I wanted to show you is this.
Let's go to the top here, we did this twice,
we did the same transition group
and then every single time that we change it.
See, we already are out of sync here,
this one's 500 and this one's 250, so let's change those
to 500 and this one also should be 500
and our CSS should also be 0.5 seconds.
It's not ideal to have this duplicated twice
because then if you need to update either of them
you need to remember that you update either of them.
So we can actually put all of these in just a variable.
So let's go right above here where we made
the rest of our variables and I'll say,
const transition options is equal to an object
and then inside of that object we're just going to convert
all of these props to properties on the object.
So the class name, this is gonna be order,
the key is going to just be the key
and the timeout is going to be just an object.
And again, we don't even need the colon key
because it's just key.
Now we have those transition options
and we can take all of our options out
and simply just spread them into that object.
And again, we can replace that here as well,
this works very similar to how I showed you
it was spreading the state.
You can just take any object and spread it into a component
and it will apply all of those options to it.
So we'll give it a save and we'll make sure
that actually still works.
Remove them, still works beautifully,
add items to our order and it works beautifully.
If I ever need to make an option change
I just need to pop this in here.
And this neat because if you even wanted to put this
in a separate file because you were using
this specific transition in many components,
that would be totally easy, you just export it
from that file, import it into this file
and you're gonna be in good shape.